README.md, before:

# Terraform Beginner Bootcamp 2023

## Semantic Versioning

This project is going to use Semantic versioning for its tagging.
[semver.org](https://semver.org/)

The general format is: 

**MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH**, example: `1.0.1` 

_Note: some projects like to name the versions with a `v` prefix. example: `v1.0.1` . This however is not scematic versioning_

- **MAJOR** version when you make incompatible API changes
- **MINOR** version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
- **PATCH** version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

Additional labels for pre-release and build metadata are available as extensions to the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format.


## Install the Terraform CLI

### Considerations with the Terraform CLI changes
The Terraform CLI installation instructions have changed due to gpg keyring changes. So we needed refer to the latest install CLI instructions via Terraform Documentation and change the scripting for install.

[Install Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)


### Considerations for Linux Distribution

This project is built against Ubunutu.
Please consider checking your Linux Distrubtion and change accordingly to distrubtion needs. 

[How To Check OS Version in Linux](
https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-to-check-os-version-in-linux-command-line/)

Example of checking OS flavor and version:

```
$ cat /etc/os-release

PRETTY_NAME="Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS"
NAME="Ubuntu"
VERSION_ID="22.04"
VERSION="22.04.3 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)"
VERSION_CODENAME=jammy
ID=ubuntu
ID_LIKE=debian
HOME_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/"
SUPPORT_URL="https://help.ubuntu.com/"
BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/"
PRIVACY_POLICY_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/legal/terms-and-policies/privacy-policy"
UBUNTU_CODENAME=jammy
```

### Refactoring into Bash Scripts

While fixing the Terraform CLI gpg depreciation issues we notice that bash scripts steps were a considerable amount more code. So we decided to create a bash script to install the Terraform CLI.

This bash script is located here: [./bin/install_terraform_cli](./bin/install_terraform_cli)

- This will keep the Gitpod Task File ([.gitpod.yml](.gitpod.yml)) tidy.
- This allow us an easier to debug and execute manually Terraform CLI install
- This will allow better portablity for other projects that need to install Terraform CLI.

#### Shebang Considerations

A Shebang (prounced Sha-bang) tells the bash script what program that will interpet the script. eg. `#!/bin/bash`

ChatGPT recommended this format for bash: `#!/usr/bin/env bash`

- for portability for different OS distributions 
-  will search the user's PATH for the bash executable

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

#### Execution Considerations

When executing the bash script we can use the `./` shorthand notiation to execute the bash script.

eg. `./bin/install_terraform_cli`

If we are using a script in .gitpod.yml  we need to point the script to a program to interpert it.

eg. `source ./bin/install_terraform_cli`

#### Linux Permissions Considerations

In order to make  bash scripts executable we need to change Linux permission for the script to be exetuable at the user/owner mode.

```sh
chmod u+x ./bin/install_terraform_cli
```

alternatively:

```sh
chmod 744 ./bin/install_terraform_cli
```

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chmod

### Github Lifecycle (Before, Init, Command)

We need to be careful when using the Init because it will not rerun if we restart an existing workspace. Check out the lifecycle details at the below orl:

https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks

### Working Env Vars

#### env command

In Shell, we can list out all Enviroment Variables (Env Vars) using the `env` command

We can filter specific env vars using grep eg. `env | grep AWS_`

#### Setting and Unsetting Env Vars

In the terminal we can set using `export HELLO='world`

In the terrminal we unset using `unset HELLO`

We can set an environemnt variables temporarily when just running a command, as below:

```sh
HELLO='world' ./bin/print_message
```
Within a bash script we can set an environment variable without writing export eg.

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

HELLO='world'

echo $HELLO
```

#### Printing Vars

We can print an env var using echo eg. `echo $HELLO`

#### Scoping of Env Vars

When you open up new bash terminals in VSCode it will not be aware of env vars that you have set in another window.

To make Env Vars to persist across all future bash terminals that are open, you need to set env vars in your ![bash profile](https://linuxhint.com/simple-guide-to-create-open-edit-bash-profile/). eg. `.bash_profile`

#### Persisting Env Vars in Gitpod

We can persist env vars into gitpod by storing them in you account's Gitpod Environement ![Variable list](https://gitpod.io/user/variables)
https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/projects/environment-variables

```
gp env HELLO='world'
```

All future workspaces launched will set the env vars for all bash terminals opened in those workspaces.

You can also set env vars in the `.gitpod.yml` but this can only contain non-senstive env vars.

Commit message:

#7 refactor AWS CLI into a bash script

README.md, after:

# Terraform Beginner Bootcamp 2023

## Semantic Versioning

This project is going to use Semantic versioning for its tagging.
[semver.org](https://semver.org/)

The general format is: 

**MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH**, example: `1.0.1` 

_Note: some projects like to name the versions with a `v` prefix. example: `v1.0.1` . This however is not scematic versioning_

- **MAJOR** version when you make incompatible API changes
- **MINOR** version when you add functionality in a backward compatible manner
- **PATCH** version when you make backward compatible bug fixes

Additional labels for pre-release and build metadata are available as extensions to the MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH format.


## Install the Terraform CLI

### Considerations with the Terraform CLI changes
The Terraform CLI installation instructions have changed due to gpg keyring changes. So we needed refer to the latest install CLI instructions via Terraform Documentation and change the scripting for install.

[Install Terraform CLI](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)


### Considerations for Linux Distribution

This project is built against Ubunutu.
Please consider checking your Linux Distrubtion and change accordingly to distrubtion needs. 

[How To Check OS Version in Linux](
https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-to-check-os-version-in-linux-command-line/)

Example of checking OS flavor and version:

```
$ cat /etc/os-release

PRETTY_NAME="Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS"
NAME="Ubuntu"
VERSION_ID="22.04"
VERSION="22.04.3 LTS (Jammy Jellyfish)"
VERSION_CODENAME=jammy
ID=ubuntu
ID_LIKE=debian
HOME_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/"
SUPPORT_URL="https://help.ubuntu.com/"
BUG_REPORT_URL="https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/"
PRIVACY_POLICY_URL="https://www.ubuntu.com/legal/terms-and-policies/privacy-policy"
UBUNTU_CODENAME=jammy
```

### Refactoring into Bash Scripts

While fixing the Terraform CLI gpg depreciation issues we notice that bash scripts steps were a considerable amount more code. So we decided to create a bash script to install the Terraform CLI.

This bash script is located here: [./bin/install_terraform_cli](./bin/install_terraform_cli)

- This will keep the Gitpod Task File ([.gitpod.yml](.gitpod.yml)) tidy.
- This allow us an easier to debug and execute manually Terraform CLI install
- This will allow better portablity for other projects that need to install Terraform CLI.

#### Shebang Considerations

A Shebang (prounced Sha-bang) tells the bash script what program that will interpet the script. eg. `#!/bin/bash`

ChatGPT recommended this format for bash: `#!/usr/bin/env bash`

- for portability for different OS distributions 
-  will search the user's PATH for the bash executable

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

#### Execution Considerations

When executing the bash script we can use the `./` shorthand notiation to execute the bash script.

eg. `./bin/install_terraform_cli`

If we are using a script in .gitpod.yml  we need to point the script to a program to interpert it.

eg. `source ./bin/install_terraform_cli`

#### Linux Permissions Considerations

In order to make  bash scripts executable we need to change Linux permission for the script to be exetuable at the user/owner mode.

```sh
chmod u+x ./bin/install_terraform_cli
```

alternatively:

```sh
chmod 744 ./bin/install_terraform_cli
```

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chmod

### Github Lifecycle (Before, Init, Command)

We need to be careful when using the Init because it will not rerun if we restart an existing workspace. Check out the lifecycle details at the below orl:

https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks

### Working Env Vars

#### env command

In Shell, we can list out all Enviroment Variables (Env Vars) using the `env` command

We can filter specific env vars using grep eg. `env | grep AWS_`

#### Setting and Unsetting Env Vars

In the terminal we can set using `export HELLO='world`

In the terrminal we unset using `unset HELLO`

We can set an environemnt variables temporarily when just running a command, as below:

```sh
HELLO='world' ./bin/print_message
```
Within a bash script we can set an environment variable without writing export eg.

```sh
#!/usr/bin/env bash

HELLO='world'

echo $HELLO
```

#### Printing Vars

We can print an env var using echo eg. `echo $HELLO`

#### Scoping of Env Vars

When you open up new bash terminals in VSCode it will not be aware of env vars that you have set in another window.

To make Env Vars to persist across all future bash terminals that are open, you need to set env vars in your [bash profile](https://linuxhint.com/simple-guide-to-create-open-edit-bash-profile/). eg. `.bash_profile`

#### Persisting Env Vars in Gitpod

We can persist env vars into gitpod by storing them in you account's Gitpod Environement [Variable list](https://gitpod.io/user/variables)
https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/projects/environment-variables

```
gp env HELLO='world'
```

All future workspaces launched will set the env vars for all bash terminals opened in those workspaces.

You can also set env vars in the `.gitpod.yml` but this can only contain non-senstive env vars.

### AWS CLI Installation

AWS CLI is installed for the project via the bash script [`./bin/install_aws_cli`](./bin/install_aws_cli)


[Getting Started Install (AWS CLI)](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)
[AWS CLI Env Vars](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-envvars.html)

We can check if our AWS credentials is configured correctly by running the following AWS CLI command:

```sh
aws sts get-caller-identity
```

If it is succesful you should see a json payload return that looks like this:

```json
{
    "UserId": "ABCDEF12ZPVHJ5WIJ5KR",
    "Account": "123456789012",
    "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::123456789012:user/terraform-beginner-bootcamp"
}
```

We will need to generate AWS CLI credentials for the [IAM User](https://us-east-1.console.aws.amazon.com/iamv2/home?region=eu-central-1#/users) in order to enable the user's access to AWS CLI.
